JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
powerful earthquake
hits Central Italy, toppling
towns and leaving
more than 150 dead, as rescuers
scramble to
save those stuck under the
rubble.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
a look at the inner workings of
the Clinton
Foundation with its president,
and why it's
become so controversial for the
Democratic
Party's nominee.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And a popular
destination
for tourists, Iceland is
becoming home to
refugees fleeing wars -- how the
close-knit
island is adapting to an influx
of outsiders.
KRISTIN ISLEIFSDOTTIR, Iceland:
I think of
our country as just a part of
the global village.
Nobody can decide where they're
born, and
I think everyone should have a
fair chance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In today's early
morning hours,
Italy's countryside was jolted
awake by an
earthquake, striking just
beneath the surface
and wreaking terrible havoc.
The official number of deaths
has reached
159, but that number is expected
to grow.
An army of rescue workers
quickly descended
on three small Italian towns
that were leveled
in the quake.
They were able to pull some
people from the
rubble, but others remain
trapped.
MAN (through translator): I
heard people asking
for help, people calling out,
asking for help,
but in this condition, what
could I do?
I have been to the center, and
it's all in
rubble.
MAN (through translator): We
came out to the
piazza, and it looked like
Dante's Inferno,
people crying for help, help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The 6.2-magnitude
earthquake
hit in the middle of the night,
just after
3:30 a.m.
It was felt across Central
Italy, but the
tiny towns of Amatrice,
Accumoli, and Pescara
del Tronto were hardest-hit.
Italian Prime Minister Matteo
Renzi arrived
in Amatrice late today after
promising the
area his full support.
MATTEO RENZI, Italian Prime
Minister (through
translator): This is a time when
we're allowed
to shed tears.
For the faithful, it is a moment
to say a
prayer.
For everyone, it is a moment of
respect and
pain.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's slow going
for the rescue
workers who are combing the
wreckage for survivors,
oftentimes using only their
hands.
ANDREA GENTILI, Rescue Worker
(through translator):
We need chain saws, shears to
cut iron bars,
and jacks to remove beams.
Everything.
We need everything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The hard work
paid off in Accumoli,
where a 65-year-old man was
pulled out of
the rubble after nine hours.
Applause followed the man as he
was loaded
into an ambulance.
We get an on-the-scene report
now from special
correspondent Christopher
Livesay, who is
in Amatrice, Italy.
We spoke just a short time ago.
Chris Livesay, welcome.
First of all, you have been
there all day
long.
What are you seeing?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: Well, I'm
seeing what
looks like the aftermath of a
war zone.
The imagery all around me is
much more similar
to what we're used to seeing
come out of places
like Aleppo and Syria, not the
idyllic hillside
town of Amatrice.
Normally, this is a place where
tourists go
to escape the heat during the
summer, especially
the month of August, which in
Italy is the
national month of vacations.
So a town of normally 2,000
people had twice
the population this time of
year, only increasing
the amount of injuries and
fatalities, unfortunately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When people think
of Italy,
of course they think of history.
Just how widespread was the
damage?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: The damage
stretches
all the way from the west coast
to the east
coast.
I mean, if you want a sense of
history and
culture, just look behind me at
the Church
of St. Augustine.
It dates back to the 14th
century.
Half of it is collapsed right
before your
eyes.
Only the belfry is really
standing.
And that's rather indicative of
the damage
that stretches all across
Central Italy, not
just here in the region of Lazio
around Rome,
but also the nearby region of
Umbria, which
has a number of artistic
heritage sites.
We're talking not just in that
region, but
all across Central Italy,
buildings that range
from the Middle Ages to the
Renaissance.
There's going to be all types of
loss, not
just of life, but, of course,
that is the
most important thing that
everyone is rushing
to save.
People all around me, volunteers
and professionals
likewise, are working around the
clock to
see if there are any survivors
still underneath
this rubble.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do they have the
resources
they need, Chris, to get this
done?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: They seem
to have all
the resources they need,
especially in terms
of manpower.
I have been overwhelmed by the
amount of volunteers
and other rescue agencies from
firefighters
to ambulance drivers to civil
protection agents,
you name it.
Even the military is chipping in
at this point.
They're all working around the
clock to help
people.
You have tents.
You have cots that have been set
up in parks.
There's a sports center that has
been converted
into a makeshift dormitory.
So, just in this town of
Amatrice, there are
temporary beds set up for
hundreds of people,
and that's the case all across
Italy right
now.
Thousands of temporary beds and
housing have
been set up.
So the people do appear to have
all the help
they need.
What they have working against
them is perhaps
the very thing that makes this
part of Italy
so picturesque, and that's the
fact that these
are small hilltop towns with
twisting and
winding roads.
Those roads were not made for
heavy vehicles,
lots of ambulances, one after
another.
They're having to negotiate the
road.
Oftentimes, there's just not
enough space
for everyone to go in and out of
these place,
so they're relying heavily on
helicopters
to air evac people into nearby
hospital, but
also hospitals as far afield as
Rome, which
is almost 100 miles from here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chris Livesay in
Amatrice,
thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five thousand
miles away
from Italy, another powerful
earthquake rocked
Myanmar today, killing at least
four people.
The 6.8-magnitude quake struck
near the town
of Chauk, 20 miles from the
former capital
of Bagan.
Officials estimated almost 200
of Bagan's
centuries-old Buddhist pagodas
were damaged.
The devastation could have been
worse, had
the quake not hit so deep
underground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Militants
attacked the American
University of Afghanistan in
Kabul, the capital,
today.
At least one person was killed
and 18 more
were wounded.
Foreign staff and dozens of
students were
reportedly trapped inside the
compound.
Student witnesses said the
shooting lasted
for more than an hour.
ZIAUCOIN, Survivor (through
translator): First,
an explosion happened, and then
we heard the
sound of gunfire.
Twenty of us were in the class.
Two bullets hit on the door of
our classroom.
All the boys escaped through the
window of
the class.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There was no
immediate claim
of responsibility.
This is the second time this
month that the
university or its staff have
been targeted.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In South
Sudan, at least
275 people have died in fighting
between government
troops and rebel forces.
Each side blamed the other today
for launching
attacks in a northeastern town
less than a
week ago.
Those reports came after word
that opposition
leader Riek Machar, who'd
recently fled the
country, is now in Sudan for
urgent medical
attention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Korea's
successful launch
of a ballistic missile triggered
swift condemnation
today.
It was fired from a submarine,
and flew over
300 miles within range of
hitting South Korea
and parts of Japan.
It is the farthest distance the
North has
successfully fired such a
weapon.
The foreign ministers of China,
Japan, and
South Korea denounced the launch
today in
Tokyo, in a rare show of unity.
WANG YI, Chinese Foreign
Minister (through
translator): China opposes North
Korea's nuclear
missile program, and opposes any
words or
deeds that could cause tensions
on the Korean
Peninsula.
China will adhere to its
consistent and firm
stand of making persistent
efforts towards
denuclearization on the
peninsula.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. State
Department echoed
that sentiment, saying its
commitment to protecting
its allies in the region from
North Korean
aggression was -- quote --
"iron-clad."
HARI SREENIVASAN: And stocks
slipped on Wall
Street today, led by drops in
the health care
and materials sectors.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
66 points to close at 18481.
The Nasdaq fell 42 points, and
the S&P 500
dropped 11.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Vice President Biden's visit to
Turkey amid
a major military push into
Syria; the Clinton
Foundation's president addresses
the recent
charges of a conflict of
interest; refugees
finding a new home in the Arctic
Circle; and
much more.
Turkish military forces launched
a major operation
inside Syria today to retake the
strategic
border town of Jarabulus from
ISIS.
Turkish and American jets
attacked from above,
as Turkish tanks and special
forces moved
into the town.
Syrian rebel groups were also
part of the
operation.
Beyond ousting ISIS from the
area, Turkey
has another motive for attacking
on Jarabulus,
to stem the ambitions of the
main U.S.-backed
Syrian Kurdish militia, known as
the YPG,
which has been taking over
territory from
ISIS.
Vice President Biden was
visiting Turkey today,
and he called upon the Kurds to
limit their
advances.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: We have made it
absolutely clear to
the elements that were part of
the Syrian
democratic forces, the YPG that
participated,
that they must move back across
the river.
They cannot, will not and under
no circumstances
get American support if they do
not keep that
commitment, period.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We examine the
significance
of all of this now with Aaron
Stein.
He's a senior fellow at the
Atlantic Council's
Rafik Hariri Center for the
Middle East.
Aaron Stein, thank you for being
here.
AARON STEIN, Atlantic Council's
Rafik Hariri
Center for the Middle East:
Thank you for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is the
significance
of this incursion across the
border into Syria?
AARON STEIN: I think the biggest
one is, it
denies ISIS one of its last
major crossing
points across the Turkish-Syrian
border.
Jarabulus has historically been
a place where
they have moved men and material
across.
So, by Turkey moving in
alongside of its host
of Arab groups, ISIS loses
territory along
its border, ISIS goes weaker.
And this is a good thing for the
U.S. and
Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But if it hadn't
been for this
move, it's possible that the
Syrian Kurds
would have been in that
territory sooner or
later, is that not right?
AARON STEIN: Yes, I think that's
the issue
here, is that the United States
is having
to thread a very fine needle.
It's having to thread the needle
very finely
here.
But it has to, one, prosecute
the war against
ISIS, where the Syrian Kurds
have become the
most prominent ground force and
the one capable
of taking the most territory,
while managing
ties with a NATO ally who is
very wary of
the Syrian Kurds moving up to
its border.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I know, for
many people,
some of these terms are hard to
follow.
I mentioned the YPG, this
particular Syrian
Kurdish group.
But let me ask you about the
U.S. interest
here, because until now it seems
the U.S.
has been careful to respect the
role of the
Kurds in that region, despite
the tensions
with Turkey's government.
What's changed?
AARON STEIN: I don't think
anything has changed.
What I think is going on is
that, in this
previous operation, the one for
the city of
Manbij, which is just a few
miles south, they
had Turkish buy-in for heavy
Turkish presence
in there, contingent upon the
larger, broader
deal that the Kurds, as the vice
president
said, would move back across the
river.
And I think that's what the vice
president
was saying today, is that the
Kurds have got
to uphold their end of the
bargain.
The United States essentially
told Turkey
that they would make the Kurds
move back.
And then concurrent to that, you
have Turkey
moving into Jarabulus.
Syria is a very complicated
place with a lot
of moving parts.
And this is just one of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But let's back up
and look
at the larger political --
geopolitical picture
here, and that has to do with
the coup attempt
in Turkey just a month or so
ago.
That's really changed the
dynamic, hasn't
it, between the U.S. and Turkey?
AARON STEIN: Right.
I don't think anybody was
planning for a coup
on July 15, a coup attempt in
Turkey on July
15.
And that's obviously complicated
relations
largely because the person that
Turkey accuses
of being the mastermind of the
coup, Fethullah
Gulen, is a U.S. green card
holder who lives
in Pennsylvania.
And there's been some back and
forth about
the extradition process.
Turkey just wishes we would hand
him over,
and the U.S., for very obvious
reasons, if
you ask me, is making Turkey
follow all the
legal steps, because, if you
really violate
those legal steps, and if you
take special
measures, even for an ally, it
sends the wrong
message that the U.S. will just
simply turn
people over.
And sometimes an ally doesn't
ask to turn
people over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, connect the
dots.
Between Turkey's nervousness and
asking to
get Fethullah Gulen back
extradited from the
United States, and then Turkey
being anxious
to put a stop to any potential
Kurdish move
in Syria, connects the two
things.
AARON STEIN: Well, so this is
where the politics
become very important.
So, the United States has an
incentive to
support Turkey, a NATO ally, as
it moves into
Syria, particularly in
Jarabulus.
And I think, moving forward,
that's where
the questions will be.
So, how long does Turkey plan to
stay in Jarabulus?
Does it have plans to move
farther?
And what is the U.S. role in
this?
And I think we're still figuring
that out,
as outsiders, and I would even
say that the
U.S. government is still
figuring that out,
because this operation does seem
to have kind
of come together relatively
quickly on the
Turkish side, even if their
plans have been
on the shelf for a little over
-- for the
past year or so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aaron Stein,
remind us why
Turkey is an important ally for
the United
States.
AARON STEIN: Well, they have
been an ally
in the NATO alliance since 1952.
It's always hard to point to why
breaking
such an alliance is a big deal,
other than,
at a time when transatlantic
relations and
the NATO alliance has come under
pressure
from the Republican presidential
candidate
for the presidency, you want to
keep the transatlantic
alliance in place.
And if you look beyond ISIS, the
threat from
the Islamic State, Turkey is in
a part of
the world where the U.S. likes
to play a role
in.
And obviously we would like to
have as many
friends as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is
clearly -- or in
part, at least, a case of the
United States
placating, wanting to make sure
it stays on
good terms with Turkey, as
Turkey deals with
its insecurity when it comes to
the Kurds.
AARON STEIN: I think we do have
an incentive
to try and reach back out to
Turkey, even
though, within Turkey, there has
been, in
my opinion, sort of an
overplaying of the
anti-American card to deflect
from what really
has been a very traumatic past
month in Turkey.
You have a failed coup attempt,
over 200 people
killed.
Parliament was bombed.
And the military was really
fractured.
So this is a big problem, and
the Turkish
leaders have leaned on
anti-American sentiment
to explain it away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, just bottom
line here,
it's a reminder that, yes, ISIS
is a big enemy,
but ISIS is not the only
complicating factor
in that part of the world.
There's a lot going on between
the Turks and
the Kurds.
AARON STEIN: Absolutely.
For Turkey, the Kurdish
sub-state actor problem
is always number one.
ISIS, I would say, is 1-A, and
now you have
to add Fethullah Gulen, who
Turkey also claims
is a sub-state actor, who they
say carried
out a coup attempt on July 15
and now lives
in the United States.
All three things came together.
And it's a very difficult time
for U.S.-Turkey
relations because of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there are a
lot of threads
to follow here.
And we thank you for helping us
understand
what's going on.
Aaron Stein, we appreciate it.
AARON STEIN: My pleasure.
Thank you very much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to the
2016 presidential
race, and the growing scrutiny
over Bill and
Hillary Clinton's namesake
foundation.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It's impossible to tell where
the Clinton
Foundation ends and the State
Department begins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That was
Republican nominee
Donald Trump today in Tampa,
Florida.
The Clinton Foundation, a
nonprofit, was started
back in 1997, and in less than
two decades,
has grown into a philanthropic
giant.
In 2014, the foundation took in
$338 million
and had $250 million in
expenses, geared toward
improving global access to AIDS
drugs, speaking
out on women's rights, and more.
But some of the countries that
contribute
to the Clinton Foundation
struggle with human
rights issues of their own, like
Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar,
and Kuwait.
And a recent Associated Press
analysis found
that about half of the 150
people from outside
government who met with or spoke
by phone
with Hillary Clinton while she
was secretary
of state either donated or
pledged donations
to the Clinton Foundation.
This morning, Clinton campaign
manager Robby
Mook responded.
ROBBY MOOK, Hillary Clinton
Campaign Manager:
By our count, there were 1,700
other meetings
that she had.
You know, she was secretary of
state.
She was meeting with foreign
officials and
government officials constantly.
So, to pull all of them out of
the equation,
cherry-pick a very small number
of meetings,
is pretty outrageous.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in a
statement posted
on Monday, Bill Clinton said
that, if Hillary
is elected, the foundation would
-- quote
-- "accept contributions only
from U.S. citizens,
permanent residents and
U.S.-based independent
foundations, and not foreign or
corporate
entities."
He also said he would step down
from its board,
and stop fund-raising for it.
DONALD TRUMP: The amounts
involved, the favors
done, and the significant number
of times
it was done require an expedited
investigation
by a special prosecutor
immediately, immediately,
immediately.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still, the
Republican ticket
has seized on the Clinton
Foundation as a
line of attack in recent days.
But as Trump's campaign stop
today made clear,
the questions swirling around
the philanthropic
group could keep on swirling as
the campaign
moves into the final stretch.
We dig into the details now,
with Doug White,
former director of Columbia
University's graduate
fund-raising management program,
and an adviser
to nonprofit groups and
philanthropists, and
James Grimaldi, investigative
reporter for
The Wall Street Journal.
Doug White, let me start with
you.
What's the core critique of how
the foundation
operates?
DOUG WHITE, Columbia University:
Well, right
now, the core critique should be
what its
mission is accomplishing around
the world.
We don't know the specifics on
that, but they
are doing a lot of good work
around the world,
from my estimation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so is
there an appearance
of impropriety or a conflict of
interest in
how the foundation works or
whether or not
it increased access to Secretary
of State
Clinton?
DOUG WHITE: There is most
definitely an appearance
of impropriety.
There's no question about that
at all.
My concern is what kind of
influence prior
to now that has been into
Secretary Clinton's
office, and then, as -- if she
becomes president,
what will the influence be then?
I don't want to have a president
who is that
enhanced by the donors of other
-- by another
charity, so that when we have
questions that
are dealing with the issue of
international
relationships, we have to
separate that from
what a foundation is all about.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James
Grimaldi, what are
the meetings that Secretary of
State Clinton
took that are raising these
concerns?
JAMES GRIMALDI, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
there was a recent Associated
Press report
that analyzed the calendars of
Secretary Clinton.
And they looked at all the
private meetings
for the first half of her tenure
at the State
Department, because that's all
that's been
released under the lawsuit they
have under
the Freedom of Information Act.
There were 145 meetings, and
about 85, I believe,
of those meetings were with
Clinton Foundation
donors.
So, that raised the question
about whether
those meetings meant that if you
paid money
to the donation or gave some
sort of gift
that you were going to get
expedited treatment
at the State Department.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even if this
is a limited
cross-section of all the
meetings that she
took, is there evidence or are
there issues
where she advocated on behalf of
companies
that might have contributed to
the foundation?
JAMES GRIMALDI: Yes, so I took a
look at that
question.
We broke down all of the donors
for the Clinton
Foundation.
We categorized them by size.
And then we looked at the
largest corporation.
Of those corporations, we then
compared them
with lobbying records that are
filed with
the United States Congress.
When we did that, we found that
60 corporations
that were lobbying the State
Department while
Hillary Clinton was secretary of
state had
given $26 million to the Clinton
Foundation.
In addition, they had
participated in commitments,
they call them, charitable
projects, with
the Clinton Foundation, valued
by the foundation
at more than $2 billion.
Those are sort of big numbers in
terms of
that.
The billions didn't go to the
Clinton Foundation.
They went to charities and
charitable activities,
but the Clinton Foundation
rightly takes some
credit for those.
So the question is, when these
favors that
Hillary is doing for certain
companies or
these companies are seeking
favors from Secretary
Clinton, were they giving
because they were
hoping she was going to help
them out?
Now, in certain cases, we know
that she actually
did help certain companies out.
But, in those cases, they were
probably for
logical, rational reasons any
secretary of
state, for example, lobbying the
Russians
to buy jets from Boeing,
lobbying Algeria
to buy $2 billion worth of
generators from
General Electric.
But we also know that both of
those companies,
as well as others like
Microsoft, Wal-Mart
who had asked for favors and
gotten them,
also had given gifts to the
Clinton Foundation,
either before, during or after
those favors
were performed by Secretary
Clinton.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Doug White,
how do we sort
out intent?
If a Boeing or Microsoft comes
in and says,
well, look, this is in our best
interest,
we were not trying to curry
favor to gain
access to her, we believe in the
causes that
the Clinton Foundation is
working on?
DOUG WHITE: I think what Jim
said is absolutely
correct. and you can't really
parse out intent.
And as a result of that, that's
why we have
the larger question of really
separating the
Clintons from the foundation.
And it's not just that there is
a conflict
of interests.
It's the execution of conflict
And as long as she has the
ability to be perceived
as having a favor or a favorite
place or person,
then the public is going to be
very excited
about that and very upset about
that.
And I don't think that's the
kind of anchor
she needs going into her
presidency, should
she be elected.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James
Grimaldi, what about
the steps that President Bill
Clinton and
the foundation said that they
are planning
to take going forward if Mrs.
Clinton is elected
to the White House?
JAMES GRIMALDI: Well, that's
interesting.
They seem to be almost in flux.
As you just reported, they will
stop taking
corporate and foreign government
gifts.
However, we found out recently,
just in the
last couple of days, there is a
major exception
to that.
It's possible and perhaps even
likely that
the Clinton Global Health Access
Initiative,
which has a separate board, may
actually continue
to take foreign government
contributions and
corporate gifts.
This was revealed to us today in
our questioning.
While we found out that Bill
Clinton will
leave the Clinton Foundation
board, we now
know that Chelsea Clinton, their
daughter,
is going to remain on the board.
And we don't know, because they
haven't said
or apparently have not decided.
She may actually be raising
money for the
Clinton Foundation going
forward.
So there's a possibility that we
will have
a president of the United States
whose daughter
is raising millions of dollars
for their foundation,
or the remnants of their
foundation, going
into her administration.
That has to be a cloud that
should -- will
probably hang over her if there
ends up being
appearances of conflicts of
interests.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James
Grimaldi, Doug White,
thank you both.
DOUG WHITE: Thank you.
JAMES GRIMALDI: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we are
joined now by
Donna Shalala, president of the
Clinton Foundation.
She served as secretary of
health and human
services in the Bill Clinton
administration.
Madam Secretary, thanks for
joining us.
Members of Hillary Clinton's
campaign, as
well as your foundation, have
said recently
that there is -- has been no
conflict of interests
in the meetings that Secretary
Clinton took
with those people who also
happen to be donors
to the Clinton Foundation.
Can you see the appearance of
impropriety?
DONNA SHALALA, President,
Clinton Foundation:
Well, our goal is to eliminate
all appearance
of impropriety if Mrs. Clinton
is elected.
And the president has already
announced not
only that we won't take any
corporate donations
or foreign donations, but he
will leave a
role in governance.
He will leave the board of the
foundation.
And, as for the other
organizations which
are our partners, we will make
sure that both
the governance is clean, but,
more importantly,
that those programs are spun
off, either as
separate 501(c)(3)s without our
participation,
or we will find partners that
will take over
the responsibility.
We help millions of people
around the world.
There are 100,000 farmers in
East Africa that
depend on the Clinton programs
for their seeds,
for technical assistance, for
training.
We have to make sure that
whether they're
women entrepreneurs in Latin
America or farmers
in Africa or Asia that all of
these programs
are seamlessly transferred
either to other
organizations or to become
independent organizations.
We have already announced that
the Clinton
Global Initiative, the great
matchmaker between
not-for-profit foundations and
corporations
to do wonderful charity work
around the world,
that that will end after this
September's
conference.
So we're taking very strong
steps, but it
would be irresponsible to do all
of this before
she is elected.
And so, if she is elected, we
will take very
strong steps that will make it
very clear
that the Clinton Foundation has
no conflict
of interests, as many as we can
reduce, by
spinning off or finding partners
for our major
programs.
We will keep some domestic
We can -- we have full
responsibility for
the Clinton Presidential
Library, for the
Clinton Center in Little Rock,
which has had
tremendous economic interests
and impact on
Arkansas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sure.
DONNA SHALALA: So, people forget
the Clinton
Foundation includes a major
presidential library
and center.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sure.
Well, I don't think anybody
would fault President
Clinton for wanting to be
involved with his
own library, but how about
having President
Clinton, Chelsea Clinton as
well, step away
completely from the foundation?
There are lots of foundations
around the planet
that are doing the work that
you're interested
in and are good at it.
DONNA SHALALA: And, in fact, we
will find
partners, successful partners,
to make sure
that the programs that we have
continue and
continue seamlessly.
And that's what we're working on
now.
The president has made this
announcement.
Chelsea has said that she is
going to stay
on the foundation board to
provide oversight
for this transformation.
And we will have announcements
about her role
in the future as well.
But I think the important thing
is that all
of this will take place and we
will make sure
it's in place if Mrs. Clinton is
elected.
We have a responsibility to
millions of people
around the world that we have --
that our
programs have an impact on.
And we simply cannot walk away
from that.
And the idea that we could just
close down
the foundation without carefully
going program
by program, and making certain
that the people
that are served by those
programs actually
continue to get those kinds of
services would
be irresponsible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If Mrs.
Clinton does win
the White House, then, would
Chelsea Clinton
step away as well from her role
on the board?
DONNA SHALALA: We will have an
announcement
about that if Mrs. Clinton is
elected.
I think the important thing now
is that we
have made a series of statements
about what
we're going to do with the
programs.
The major programs, we have
actually been
very clear about.
And we have some smaller
programs that we're
working through, thinking about
what partners
and talking to partners.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sure.
DONNA SHALALA: But all of this
takes place
if she is elected.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ms. Shalala,
President Bill
Clinton is no stranger to
politics.
Neither is Hillary Clinton.
Even as she was being confirmed
for the secretary
of state position, several
senators tried
to bring this up, the appearance
of impropriety,
the potential conflict of
interests.
But the question really is, is
that does the
foundation offer an opportunity,
a vehicle
to access a sitting secretary of
state, a
senator or possibly a president?
There are so many different --
in these e-mails,
we see people have who have
given significant
amounts of money have access or
have had access
at short notice to her.
Is that a coincidence?
DONNA SHALALA: I wouldn't
describe it as a
coincidence, but let me say
this, that we
know very clearly what conflict
of interests
we have to eliminate as part of
the foundation.
We're focused on the foundation
program.
And no one should assume, if
they give a gift
to the foundation, that they're
going to get
access to Mrs. Clinton or to
President Clinton
because of that for the purposes
of changing
public policy.
And we're committed to that.
The president is committed to
that.
There was a memorandum of
agreement between
the secretary and the
administration that
she went in to.
I think it was signed off on by
the Foreign
Relations Committee.
And while we made one small
mistake, in my
judgment, in terms of what we
were supposed
to submit through that process,
as far as
I'm concerned, we have kept --
we kept to
that agreement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sure.
DONNA SHALALA: But, more
importantly, what
we're doing now is very
significant.
We cannot do the same types of
things that
we did when she was secretary of
state.
We have to take a much stronger
position to
eliminate any perception of
conflict of interests.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
I think that right now,
unfortunately, because
this is the political season,
the examples
that are being brought out in
these e-mails
happen to be in the public
domain now.
Right?
You have got a billionaire that
was coincidentally
at a breakfast meeting at the
New York Stock
Exchange.
The next day, the State
Department starts
working on a visa request on his
behalf, the
wife of another billionaire who
got a last-minute
meeting.
We have got another billionaire.
I mean, it sort of -- without
having to cherry-pick
individual meetings, it clearly
to the American
public points out that there
seemed to be
a line.
If you helped the foundation,
you had access
to Mrs. Clinton.
And I think the concern is...
DONNA SHALALA: Well, I think we
have to be
careful about that conclusion.
The major companies in the
United States,
the multinationals spend
billions of dollars
lobbying in Washington.
So, I don't think that anyone
has made any
connection there.
But here's what's important.
What's important to us is that
there are millions
of people around the world whose
lives are
improved by the work of the
Clinton Foundation,
whose lives have been changed by
the work
of the Clinton Foundation.
We have to make sure that work
continues.
The president has reinvented
philanthropy
in this country.
This is an extraordinary
foundation.
And no one in the foundation
wants to see
these attacks or in any way be
perceived as
having a conflict of interests.
And by the end of the election,
if she wins,
it will be very clear to the
American people
what we will do and what
programs will remain
in the foundation.
The only thing I can assure you
at the moment
is the Clinton Library is going
to remain
in the foundation and that the
president is
going to visit his foundation,
library.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
Thank you, Donna Shalala, the
president of
the Clinton Foundation.
Thanks for joining us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
drastic spike
in the price of EpiPens used to
combat allergic
reactions; and the astronomical
discovery
of an Earth-like planet.
But, first: Anti-immigrant
sentiment is on
the rise in Europe, and it has
spread to Iceland,
one of the more unusual
destinations for refugees
from the war in Syria.
But many people on this island
nation in the
middle of the North Atlantic
welcome the prospect
of their traditionally white,
Christian country
becoming more multicultural.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from the Icelandic capital,
Reykjavik.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Outside
Iceland's tiny Parliament,
pro-refugee supporters outnumber
and encircle
a group from a new party called
the Icelandic
National Front, which objects to
recent legislation
relaxing rules on immigration.
One of their standard-bearers is
nurse Maria
Magnusdottir.
MARIA MAGNUSDOTTIR, Icelandic
National Front:
We do not want people that are
not adapting
to our culture, like, for
example, Muslims.
I'm not saying that all Muslims
are bad people.
But, unfortunately, they are not
adapting
to cultures.
So, like, in Europe, we can see
two cultures
in most of those countries.
And that is what we are afraid
of.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One of the
cheerleaders on
the other side is Salmann
Tamimi, a Palestinian
imam who stopped off in Iceland
en route to
North America in the 1970s, and
never left.
SALMANN TAMIMI, Imam: You see
how many supporters
are, five, six, 10 times more
than the other
guys.
And this is how the Icelandic
society is,
really.
We have maybe 2 or 3 percent who
are what
I call racists and fascists.
And -- but the majority is nice
people and
we are happy for their support
that we are
getting.
WOMAN: The population is very
small here in
Iceland.
We are very few persons.
And if you open all the borders,
then we're
in trouble.
MALCOLM BRABANT: "This is a
disgusting use
of the flag," shouts Logi
Stefansson, a well-known
musician who shares Icelandic
and Angolan
heritage.
LOGI STEFANSSON, Musician: They
want to basically
keep the country white.
They're talking about -- like,
they have 800
asylum-seekers coming next year,
which is,
like, a disgraceful number.
That's too small.
They just want the white
supremacy.
Like, seriously, the system for
asylum-seekers
in Iceland is disgusting.
They get treated like dogs.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But the
treatment afforded
the Al-Mohammad family from
Aleppo has been
exemplary.
The Al-Mohammads left Syria for
Lebanon in
2012, signed up for the U.N.
refugee resettlement
program, and in January were
told that they
were going to Iceland.
Although it wasn't their choice,
English teacher
Khattab is not complaining.
KHATTAB AL-MOHAMMAD, Syrian
Refugee: This
is now the dream of most of the
Syrians, to
restore the happiness of their
children and
find a means for making this
happen.
And we were very lucky to be
here, for example,
and have this chance to play,
because other
children in Syria now, they are
killed by
the -- our criminal president
and his supporters.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Al-Mohammad,
his wife, their
six children and his mother,
have been given
an apartment in the middle-class
neighborhood
of Akureyri, a northern town
less than 40
miles from the Arctic Circle.
KHATTAB AL-MOHAMMAD: We found a
lot of similarities
between the two societies, for
example, the
safety of children, and the
educational system,
health care.
These are free in Syria, and now
we found
it here.
And maybe the most obstacle was
the weather,
the climate itself.
So, we used to have sunny days.
A little bit were cold winter,
but not snow
for, for example, six months.
It's very hard for us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The local
council is working
hard to integrate the newcomers.
And the refugee coordinator is
visiting to
help the family with temporary
citizenship
documents that will enable them
to travel
freely throughout Europe.
Al-Mohammad is looking to get
off welfare
benefits and is seeking a
business partner
to set up a restaurant.
KHATTAB AL-MOHAMMAD: Although we
are -- appreciate
their help, but we want to
participate in
this society and in the economy
of this country.
So, we don't like to be living
on this kind
of charity.
And I suppose all the Syrians
are trying their
best in the different places.
We are normally independent.
We don't like to be dependent on
someone.
WOMAN (through translator): I'm
very happy.
Icelanders are good people.
The country is very generous and
welcoming.
And we are proud to be here and
to be part
of this country.
BOY (through translator): I'm
happy here.
I have friends to play ball
with.
HALINA AL-MOHAMMAD, Syrian
Refugee (through
translator): Of course it's
better here, and
secure.
The living here is good,
especially the kids'
school.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Akureyri is a
bustling town
of 18,000 people, popular with
tourists for
whale watching and another
nature pursuits.
The council is anxious to avoid
the mistakes
of much bigger countries, which
have created
ghettos by placing immigrants
together.
In a nation of just 330,000
people, it's much
easier to house refugees amongst
Icelanders.
The town's Red Cross has
organized a support
group whose purpose is to help
the newcomers
find their feet and bloom.
KARI LAURSSON, Iceland: I hope
that, if at
some point, Iceland would go
sort of be a
war zone or something like that,
someone somewhere
else on the planet would welcome
me as well
as they possibly can.
KRISTIN ISLEIFSDOTTIR, Iceland:
I think of
our country as just a part of
the global village.
Nobody can decide where they're
born, and
I think everyone should have a
fair chance.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Two of the
volunteers are
heading out to the house of an
electrician
from Damascus called Joumaa
Naser, who lives
with his wife and their five
children.
NGIBJORG STEFANSDOTTIR, Red
Cross Volunteer:
They don't speak English but
they're very
good at practicing Icelandic.
And we are helping them to
learn.
I want to teach them how to be
themselves
in our society and to use the
Icelandic language.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As the girls
help one of
the younger children with his
Icelandic, the
town's cultural coordinator is
on hand to
translate a conversation between
one of the
sons, who is just about to start
high school,
and his new teachers.
Joumaa Naser's skills as an
electrician are
in demand, and he's happy to be
working.
JOUMAA NASER, Syrian Refugee
(through translator):
In the long term future, we
haven't yet decided
what's going to happen.
But for the immediate future, we
are settling
here.
This is good for the children.
They feel safe here.
They will get an education.
But, ultimately, our aim is to
get back to
Syria, when it's safe to do so.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Much of the
debate about
refugees and immigration centers
on multiculturalism
and religion.
But the realpolitik of hard cash
has entered
the fray.
Ever since the financial crisis
of 2008, Iceland
has been trying to get back on
its feet, and
it has succeeded.
The economy is booming.
The growth rate here is about 4
percent a
year, and, according to the
country's business
leaders, Iceland needs 2,000
immigrants a
year to maintain that level of
growth.
Akureyri's Mayor Eirokur
Bjorgvinsson is very
clear where he stands on the
issue.
EIROKUR BJORGVINSSON, Mayor of
Akureyri: Some
people say that the people need
also social
support.
So it is also money getting out.
But they are giving more back
than they have
actually received.
Maybe they have received
something for months
or years, but in the long term,
they will
give much more back than they
have received.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As elsewhere in
Europe, some
Icelanders have a profound fear,
if not phobia,
of Islam.
KHATTAB AL-MOHAMMAD: Islam is a
group of values,
not only just praying and you
agree that -- values.
The values of Islam, we see it
here.
So, why are they afraid?
The values, to be honest, the
value of to
be helpful, the value to be
democratic, the
value of being human, these are
the values
of Islam.
And we found them here.
We missed them in Syria, but we
found them
here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: anger,
criticism and
concern over the soaring cost
for a life-saving
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: anger,
criticism and
concern over the soaring cost
for a life-saving
allergy shot.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: The price of EpiPens
has jumped
more than 400 percent since
2009.
Back then, pharmacies paid $103
for a set
of two.
As of May, the price had spiked
to $608.
Mylan, the drug company that
bought EpiPens
in 2007, says nearly 80 percent
of commercially
insured patients don't pay
anything at all,
and they have given away
hundreds of thousands
of EpiPens for free.
But more than 3.5 million
prescriptions were
written last year, and some
consumers are
paying hundreds of dollars,
depending on their
insurance coverage.
Now the issue is attracting
political attention.
Today, Hillary Clinton called
the price hikes
outrageous, and senators from
both parties
are calling for hearings and
explanations
from the company.
Democratic Senator Amy Klobuchar
of Minnesota
joins us now.
Senator Klobuchar, everyone has
known someone,
as we were talking about
earlier, knows someone
who is carrying one of these
EpiPens.
But you have got very direct
personal experience.
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR (D), Minnesota:
Yes, John.
My daughter, Abigail, when she
was just 4
or 5 years old, we gave her a
cashew.
We were in the middle of the
North Woods,
and she could hardly breathe.
And I literally remember every
mile of that
nearly hour-long drive to the
hospital, not
knowing if she would make it.
And that started our journey
with allergies.
She still carries an EpiPen
today.
When she was growing up, we all
had to learn
how to stick it into her thigh.
And that's how it is for so many
parents and
so many patients that carry
those today.
So, to go from $100 to $600, a
400 to 500
percent price increase, to go
from 9 percent
profit margin in 2008 to 55
percent in 2014,
which this company did, to me,
this is an
outrage.
And it really is not an isolated
incident.
We're seeing other companies do
this as well,
pharmaceutical companies, with
lifesaving
drugs every day.
JOHN YANG: We should say that we
invited Mylan
to join us here today.
They said they couldn't make
anyone available
today.
They did issue a statement.
They talked about the changes
they have made
in the product over the years,
but they also
pointed to the insurance
companies, the changing
nature of the insurance
companies, with the
growth of high-deductible plans.
They said: "This current and
ongoing shift
has presented new challenges for
consumers,
and now they are bearing more of
the cost."
What's your response?
What's your reaction to that?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: OK.
Well, first of all, they
probably have made
some improvements, but there is
no way those
improvements are at a 500
percent margin on
that -- the original product.
How could they be 500 percent
more than the
product itself in terms of the
value?
That makes no sense to me.
Secondly, when it comes to the
fact that they
have been selling these things
at this high
price, and they blame insurance
companies
and government and everyone
else, their profit
margin is the one that's gone
up.
They're the ones that made more
money.
And the fact that you have these
high-deductible
plan, it just means consumers
are starting
to see what they have charged
for years.
Before, it was buried.
Before, the taxpayers were
paying it, because
the companies were paying it or
the government
was paying it.
And that doesn't at all take
away from the
fact that you can get their
exact same product
for hundreds of dollars less in
Canada.
They are making money off the
backs of people
with allergies, and particularly
families
with kids with allergies that
really have
to buy not just two of these,
but four of
them, six of them a year because
they have
to have some at school, they
have to have
some in their bags, they have to
have some
at grandma's.
Things get lost.
And this is not the product they
should have
chosen to make these dramatic
price increases
in.
JOHN YANG: Something you just
said, you said
that this same product is being
said in Canada
for how much?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Hundreds of
dollars less.
Of course, it varies.
I have had a lot of people write
in to my
Facebook page that they can get
it online
from a Canadian pharmacy in
Australia for
$180.
And one of the bills I have with
John McCain,
which we're really trying to
push through,
would be to allow competitive
prices, competitive
products, reimportation of
products from Canada.
JOHN YANG: You're the ranking
Democrat on
the Antitrust Committee of the
Judiciary Committee.
You have called for hearings.
You have called for the FTC to
look into this.
What else can you do?
What can you do as -- in
Congress?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, I just keep
talking about
it and going to my colleagues
and saying,
this is getting to the point now
where we
have to have a vote on this.
We have to pass something.
And I'm going to continue to do
that.
I think having regular people
call in to their
members of Congress is going to
make a big
difference here.
Any of these bills would be
helpful, but I
think the most helpful, as we go
into a new
year and a new administration,
would be negotiations
under Medicare Part D for the
problem as a
whole, where you have seen, you
know, 100
percent increase in four of the
top 10 drugs
in just the last few years.
And negotiations under Medicare
Part D would
harness the power of all of
America's seniors.
Those prices go down, and then
it helps with
other insurance plans as well.
JOHN YANG: Senator, I have to
ask you, one
fact that's getting a lot of
attention is
that the CEO of this company is
the daughter
of one of your Democratic
colleagues, the
daughter of Senator Joe Manchin
from West
Virginia.
Is this an issue or something
you would talk
to Senator Manchin about?
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: Well, no, Senator
Manchin has
always kept an arm's length with
me when dealing
with any issues with this
company.
So I haven't seen this as
something where
he's been somehow carrying the
water for his
daughter or improperly involved.
So, I want to make that clear.
But, at the same time, pharma as
a whole,
there is absolutely no doubt
they have been
against all these bills I just
mentioned,
many of which are bipartisan.
And so it is time to get votes
on these bills
and to move forward, as well as
have an investigation
into this individual case with
EpiPen.
JOHN YANG: Senator Klobuchar,
thanks so much
for joining us.
SEN.
AMY KLOBUCHAR: It was good to be
on.
Thanks for covering this
important issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Time now for
our weekly
segment on science called the
Leading Edge,
and the discovery of another
possible Earth-like
planet that is grabbing
worldwide attention
today.
It is true, scientists have
previously said
they believe there are other
planets outside
our solar system that resemble
Earth in size
and may have liquid water.
But this latest finding is the
closest planet
yet found.
Yes, it's four light years from
Earth, just
a mere 25 trillion miles away.
But travel there may be possible
by the end
of the century, maybe not for me
and you.
The planet is called Proxima b,
circling a
small star called Proxima
Centauri.
As shown in this animation, it's
thought to
be about 1.3 times the mass of
Earth, probably
rocky like the Earth, and
possibly warm enough
for liquid water.
Let's learn more now from our
science correspondent
and resident space expert, Miles
O'Brien.
Miles, first of all, why are
they so excited
about this?
We have heard about the planets
and this kind
of Goldilocks, not too hot, not
too cold,
places before?
MILES O'BRIEN: Location,
location, location,
Hari.
We're talking now of about more
than 3,000
planets total, exoplanets in the
catalogue,
and growing by the minute, but
this is the
closest one that's been
discovered.
And that is what has scientists
quite interested.
Four light years is, in
astronomical terms,
a trip to the convenience store.
And so the idea that there might
be something
somewhat within the realm of
attainable if
we come up with some really cool
rocket propulsion
ideas gets people thinking.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How do we know
it is what
it is?
We can't see it from our eyes.
There's telescopes that see
things, but they
didn't really get a picture of
this planet.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's indirect.
Imagine driving down a darkened
highway and
a car coming at with its high
beams on.
You don't know anything about
that car, do
you?
But there are some ways to kind
of figure
this out using some interesting
technology.
In this case, what they used was
the slight
wobble that occurs as these two
bodies interact
with each other.
As the planet orbits around, the
star itself
moves ever so slightly.
That's enough to infer that its
presence is
there.
There are a few other ways to do
it.
You can actually detect the
slight diminishment
of light as a planet passes in
front of a
star and infer that its presence
is there
that way.
That's how the Kepler space
telescope has
done its work so well over the
years for NASA.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, tell us
what scientists
think they know about this
planet in relation
to the Earth.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, I don't
think we want
to live there, Hari.
It's 11 days around its star, so
an 11-day
year.
It is tidily locked, which means
there is
a light side always and a dark
side always.
So I suppose the real estate on
the light
side might be better.
I don't know.
If you're a night owl, maybe you
want to go
to the other side.
It's very close to its star, but
the star
itself is a brown dwarf.
It's a pretty wimpy star.
And so it can be closer and be
in what scientists
call the Goldilocks zone, the
just-right zone
where the temperatures are just
right for
water to exist in liquid form.
And here's the thing to
remember.
Wherever we look on this planet,
no matter
where we go, deep down in the
ocean, in acid
springs in Yellowstone, if there
is liquid
water, we find life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so there
could possibly
be -- even under this star's
light, there
could be something maybe
subterranean, life
underground, or whatever
constitutes ground
on that planet?
MILES O'BRIEN: It will take a
while, maybe
a decade, to kind of figure this
all out,
because, again, we haven't seen
it directly.
And -- but this is something
that has scientists
very intrigued.
And as technology improves --
and NASA will
be launching another spacecraft
coming up
in a year or so called TESS that
will be a
little more powerful and will be
looking a
little bit closer to us than its
predecessor,
Kepler.
Possibly, it will solve some of
those questions
for us and determine if, in
fact, there might
be life that close to us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so there
are some projects
kind of at least planned on
getting very,
very small sort of sensors or
objects out
farther and farther into space.
How could we ever, in our
lifetimes, maybe
not in our lifetime, our
children's lifetimes,
reach this to get a look at it?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, we have to
think about
some new ways of doing
propulsion in space.
Some sort of nuclear option is
what we're
talking about here.
Once you get into space, if you
can have steady
propulsion that never stops,
fueled by some
sort of nuclear reaction, you
continue to
accelerate, because there's no
friction in
space, of course.
And so ultimately you can
develop some real
speed.
And, potentially, some ideas on
the drawing
board could make that trip of
four light years
something on the order of a
century or maybe
a little less.
Right now, if you wanted to,
say, launch the
space shuttle, not that it could
go there,
but if you wanted to, just for
point of reference,
it would be more than 100,000
years to get
there.
Voyager, for example, just
leaving our solar
system, if you aimed it at this
newly discovered
planet, voyager would take about
70,000 years
to get there.
So, that gives you an idea,
where it's not
just billions and billions.
We're talking trillions and
trillions here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And to get a
photo back
from there would take several
years too.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, you know,
that's just
it.
The speed of light,
four-and-a-half light
years away, so it's
four-and-a-half years
to get any transmission back and
forth.
So it would be really hard to
engage in any
sort of jokes with the people
who might live
on this planet.
You know, comedy is timing, of
course.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
Miles O'Brien joining us from
Boston, thanks
so much.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're going
there, right?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Oh, yes, soon.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.